The National Institute of Technology Agartala, shortened to NIT Agartala or NITA, is a technology-oriented institute of higher education established by India's Ministry of Human Resource Development in Agartala, India. It was founded as Tripura Engineering College in 1965 and declared a National Institute of Technology (NIT) in 2006. It is now the leading technical institute in the northeastern region of India after NIT Silchar and IIT Guwahati. It is considered a new institute in the family of NIT (2006–10 session) after NIT Jalandhar and NIT Hamirpur and is designated an Institute of National Importance by an act of parliament.[1] As with all other National Institutes of Technology, admission to NITA is granted through the centrally organised Joint Entrance Examination.NIT agartala is one of the fastest developing NIT.

Established 	1965; upgraded to National Institute of Technology in 2006
Type 	Education and Research Institute
Director 	Dr. Gopal Mugeraya
Academic staff 	90
Admin. staff 	50
Students 	3300
Undergraduates 	3000
Postgraduates 	300
Location 	Agartala, Tripura, India
Campus 	335 acres (1.36 km2)
Acronym 	NITA
Website 	www.nita.ac.in

Location

The Institute is 4 km off National Highway (NH-44) and about 20 km away from the capital city, Agartal. The nearest rail station is about 2 km away. Several airlines connect Agartal to Delhi, Kolkata, Guwahati and Mumbai directly.

The campus is located at 23°58′N 91°25′E.

Initiatives

The Institute was converted from a State Engineering College to a National Institute of Technology in 2006. To better reflect this new status, the total seats were increased from 250 to 420 for the academic session 2007 – 2008. Recently, undergraduate courses were introduced in electrical and electronics engineering, transportation engineering and production engineering. The Civil Engineering Department has started a postgraduate programme in structural engineering to fulfill a state requirement. The campus, which had been nonresidential, was made residential for the 2007 – 2008 session with the reopening of two boys hostels and one girls hostel. A master plan is[when?] under preparation for 335 acres (1.36 km2) of land where a new campus will be built with modern facilities meeting the overall requirements of the Institute. The Institute is getting[when?] a 33 kilovolt dedicated power supply through Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited, for uninterrupted power supply in the campus. The R. D. Department of the government of Tripura[clarification needed] took total charge of renovation of the existing buildings after conversion to NIT. The Institute has also obtained a grant of 12 crore (120 million) rupees from DoNER[clarification needed] for the development of infrastructure, including the extension of the library building and the Academic Building, development of the centralized computer centre, a new water treatment plant and boys' and girls' common room. The campus is now totally connected through Wi-Fi with a WiMAX wireless backbone, and all e-journal facilities are available in the digital library of NIT Agartala.
Academics

This institute offers nine four-year undergraduate programs in engineering. All undergraduate programs lead to a Bachelor of Technology (BTech) degree. Post graduate Master's of Technology (M.Tech) courses in chemical engineering, civil engineering, civil and structural engineering, electrical, electronic and computer engineering, instrumentation, and mechanical engineering are also offered. From July 2013, dual-degree courses in engineering physics and a five-year integrated course in applied physics, chemistry and mathematics have also been started. NITA is the second NIT in India (after National Institute of Technology Calicut), and sixth among all NITs and IITs (Indian Institutes of Technology), to start a program in engineering physics. The Department of Computer Science and Engineering offers a three-year degree leading to a Master's in Computer Applications (MCA) course. PhD and post-doctorate fellowships are offered by some departments. NIT Agartala also offers a CDAAC[clarification needed] programme. NIT-Agartala is ranked tenth among thirty NITs.[3]
Departments
Undergraduate
Bio Engineering
Civil Engineering
Chemical Engineering
Computer Science & Engineering
Electrical Engineering
Electronics & Communication Engineering
Electronics & Instrumentation Engineering
Dual degree in Engineering Physics
Mechanical Engineering
Production Engineering
Others
Master of Computer Applications
Master of Business and Administration
School of Hydro-Informatics Engineering
Applied Mathematics(BS-MS dual degree)
Applied Physics(BS-MS dual degree)
Applied Statistics(BS-MS dual degree)
Chemistry (BS-MS dual degree)
Accreditation

In 2013, the mechanical and civil engineering branches of the Institute were accredited by the National Board of Accreditation for five years, while the electrical engineering branch was provisionally accredited for two years.[4]

Student life

Facilities include a central library and a computer services center with internet access, as well as the departmental Computer Centers. The Institute provides boarding facilities to the students and the faculty members on the campus. The students also have the option of staying outside the campus and studying as day scholars. Currently, the institute has four boys' hostels, one girls' hostel and an additional hostel for freshmen only. All the hostels are Wi-Fi enabled. Since the construction works are getting delayed[vague], every two freshmen are allotted a single 120 square feet (11 m2) room.

The annual tech-fest, Aayam, and the cultural fest, Moksha are organised by the third year undergraduate students. Aayam 2012 included a lecture by Udaya Kumar, the designer of the Indian rupee sign.[5]

There are many other clubs such as the science club, enlightenment club, electronics club, robotics club, Tech-Addicts club, and photography club.

The Students' Gymkhana was founded in 2011.

The Fifth Dimension is the campus e-magazine and newspaper published by the Tech-Addicts club.

The Institute hosts some national level events such as the North East Regional Debate, organized by the Tech-Addicts club. This event has since been re-christened as Unnayan 1.0 and Unnayan 2.0 is scheduled on 17–19 October 2014.
Halls of residence
Aryabhatta Hostel Lawn view
Boys' Hostels
Aryabhatta Hostel (open to students of every year) 	capacity 1200
Dhalai Hostel (final year only) 	capacity 250
Gomati Hostel (second year only) 	capacity 124
Howrah Hostel (second year only) 	capacity 124
Girls' Hostel
Gargi Hostel 	capacity 500
Campus facilities

The Institute has all basic infrastructural facilities for conducting the undergraduate courses satisfactorily. It has an adequate number of well qualified and experienced faculty members and technical supporting staff. It has a well stocked library, computer facilities, workshop and laboratories relevant to the courses of study.

The school's campus is nearly 500 acres.
Digital Library

The library's lending service is available from 8:00 AM to 8:00 PM. It contains a reading room as well as a back-volume section[clarification needed], an indexing and reference section, and a stock room with more than 34,000 books and 200 journals. The library also contains a high-speed copying facility, along with scanning facilities. All e-journal facilities are available in the digital library. Each hostel has a library as well.

The school maintains a central computer laboratory with a centralised server. In addition, there are four departmental modular computer laboratories with a separate broadband connection for every terminal. The computers are connected through the ERNET Internet backbone. The campus has an intranet facility for file sharing and communication, and has campus-wide Wi-Fi.

The Institute runs private bus services from Agartala to the Institute campus and back during working hours. In cases of emergency an adequate number of buses, jeeps and private vehicles are available on NH-44 for traveling from Agartala. It is mandatory for all students travelling from Agartala to Institute Campus to use the private bus facility; however, the requirement may be relaxed in special cases.

The Institute has a large green floodlighted sports field for cricket and football. It also has separate courts for basketball and volleyball. The much awaited Sports Complex was dedicated[when?] by Shri Pranab Mukherjee, the President of India, when he attended the institute's fifth convocation.

Visveswaraya NITA Auditorium is on campus for important occasions and cultural functions. Presently it has seating capacity of more than 1,500. Meanwhile[when?] the construction of the new auditorium is almost completed.

NIT Agartala is the first NIT in India to have a Kendriya Vidyalaya.

The Institute has its own e-zine, The Fifth Dimension, providing news of all activities occurring throughout the campus.[6]
College Festivals

A 4-day annual cultural fest, Moksha, and an annual techno-management fest[clarification needed], Aayam, are hosted by the third year under graduate students. These occasions have witnessed a massive gathering in recent years[when?] and are among the most popular college fests in the whole north east region. Second year students organise Sankalp, a techno cultural fest, every year.

Popular musical bands, such as Underground Authority, Korral Reef, Divine Connection, Parikrama, and Pentagram have performed[when?] in the Moksha.

Prominent personalities appearing at Aayam have included author Chetan Bhagat in 2010, Kumar Vishwas in 2012, and Indian Idol contestant Amit Sana in 2013, among other[who?] high profile scientists, scholars and dignitaries from across the nation and abroad.

Music director and singer Vishal Dadlani sang at a rock concert in Moksha 2013.

Singer, music composer and lyricist Sona Mohapatra performed in Aayam 2014.

Bengali singer Manna Dey performed in a cultural fest on campus in 1985, when NITA was still Tripura Engineering College.
Cheapest Car Innovation

NIT Agartala students made[when?] what they called the "world's cheapest car", costing less than Rs 8500. A group of students working on the production, using only scraps, built a 2 stroke petrol car. This is the first time a chain sprocket system and steering were used in the car mechanism.[citation needed]
NITA as knowledge hub

The Institute is now known as knowledge hub, with the introduction of more specialized subjects like hydroinformatics and aeronautics. NIT Agartala has also received awards from the first World Education Congress in the category of engineering colleges, and has been ranked in National B-School Award[clarification needed] by ABP News in 2012 and in 2013.
