The National Institute Of Technology Delhi (abbreviated NIT Delhi or NITD) is a public engineering institution located in Delhi, India. It has been declared as an Institute of National Importance by an act of Parliament of India.[citation needed] It is one of the NITs along with other National Institute of Technology institutions in India.

Established	2010
Type	Public institution
Chairman	Shri. R. Santhanam
Director	Prof. Ajay K Sharma
Location	New Delhi, Delhi, India
Campus	Urban
Acronym	NITD
Website	www.nitdelhi.ac.in

Location[edit]
National Institute of Technology Delhi,
Institute of Applied Manpower Research (IAMR Campus),
A-7, Institutional Area,
Near Satyawadi Raja Harish Chandra Hospital,
Narela, Delhi – 110040

Academics[edit]
Admissions[edit]
National Admissions[edit]
The admissions to the B. Tech program of the institute is solely carried out through the Joint Entrance Exam (Main) organised by the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) on the directions of the Ministry of Human Resource Develpoment, Government of India. The seats are allotted by the Central Seat Allocation Board (CSAB). Fifty percent of seats are reserved under Home State category for Delhi and Chandigarh students. The remaining fifty percent seats are filled by students of other states.

International Admissions[edit]
Admissions for foreign nationals is carried out by Direct Admission for Students Abroad (DASA) under the Ministry of HRD. The admissions are on the basis of the SAT score of the eligible candidates. The number of seats available for foreign nationals in each branch at NITD is 4 and these are over and above the intake (currently 60) of each branch.

Branches[edit]
NIT Delhi started admitting students from the academic session 2010-11 with an intake of 30 students in each of the following branches of Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech) programmes:-

Computer Science and Engineering
Electrical and Electronics Engineering
Electronics and Communication Engineering
Intake at UG level enhanced to 60 w.e.f. 2013-14.

NITD started M.Tech. In Electronics and Communication Engineering w.e.f. 2013-14.

NITD started Doctoral programmes w.e.f. 2014.

NITD is going to start M.Tech. In Computer Science and Engineering with specialisation in Analytics w.e.f. 2014-15.

In near future NIT Delhi plans to offer more programmes and disciplines of studies and to offer Masters and Doctoral programmes in all disciplines of interest to the institute with overall strength of 20,000 students.

Departments[edit]
Currently, the following four departments are functioning in the institute:-

Computer Science and Engineering
Electrical and Electronics Engineering
Electronics and Communication Engineering
Science and Humanities

Library[edit]
The Central Library, NITD was established in the year 2012 (10 June 2012) in Dwarka to facilitate the access to information resources to faculty and students of the Institute. It moved to its present location IAMR Campus, Narela Institutional Area on 18 February 2014. It is housed on the first floor of the building with beautiful surroundings and is in midst of the campus which is easily accessible from all departments and hostels. All the faculty members, students and staff of the Institute are entitled to access all the library facilities and services. The library is growing rapidly with exponential increase in number and type of collection to serve the information needs of the clientele in the field of Social Sciences & Humanities and Engineering & Physical Sciences. The automation of library service is also being carried out through RFID-cum-library card.

Computer Centre[edit]
The Computer Centre, NITD was established on 18/02/2014, to cater to the computational requirements of the Institute.

The Computer Centre maintains and manages WiFi facility through rack mounted blade servers in the campus having High speed (single mode) fiber backbone, managed by Layer 4 Switches providing 250 Mbps (1:1) bandwidth Speed. These networking facilities are also extended to Hostel and Residential areas.

Student Life[edit]
Festivals[edit]
Halls of Residence[edit]
The hostels of the institute are located within the IAMR campus and in the residential quarters of the nearby Satyawadi Raja Harish Chandra Hospital. Currently, first year students are being accommodated in the Hospital's quarters while rest of the students are accommodate in the IAMR premises. Another hostel of the institute is located at YWCA, Rohini which is solely used for accommodation of girl students. Mess facility is available in all the premises.

Buses are provided for the transportation of the girl students in Rohini to-and-from the Institute premises. One side journey takes about an hour. Bus facility is also provided for day scholar students to-and-from Jahangirpuri metro staion to the institute. The journey takes about 20 minutes.
